docs/guides/checking_migrations.md, before:

# Linting Migrations

Postgres Language Tools comes with a `check` command that can be integrated into your development workflow to catch problematic schema changes and encourage best practices.

To run it, simply point at your migrations directory.

```sh
postgrestools check supabase/migrations
```

When you are setting it up in an existing project, you might want to ignore all migrations that are already applied. To do so, add `migrationsDir` and `after` to your `postgrestools.jsonc` file


```json
{
    "migrations": {
        "migrationsDir": "supabase/migrations",
        "after": 1740868021
    }
}
```

Alternatively, pass them directly.

```
postgrestools check supabase/migrations --migrations-dir="supabase/migrations" --after=1740868021
```

This will only check migrations after the specified timestamp.

For pre-commit hooks and when working locally, use `--staged` to only lint files that have been staged. In CI environments, you most likely want to use `--changed` to only lint files that have been changed compared to your `vcs.default_branch` configuration. If `default_branch` is not set in your `postgrestools.jsonc`, use `--since=REF` to specify the base branch to compare against.

Commit message:

chore: postgrestools.jsonc -> postgres-language-server.jsonc (#559)
- primary config file is now `postgres-language-server.jsonc`
- we still support `postgrestools.jsonc` as a fallback
- added warnings to lsp (via message) and cli if deprecated config file
is used
- updated all references in the documentation
<img width="1920" height="186" alt="Screenshot 2025-10-18 at 20 47 22"
src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/babbd438-72f9-442a-98bb-5ae0cc134213"
/>
<img width="1920" height="173" alt="Screenshot 2025-10-18 at 21 22 45"
src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cfeda8c0-c83c-4e76-973f-31c64fe1a0a0"
/>

docs/guides/checking_migrations.md, after:

# Linting Migrations

Postgres Language Tools comes with a `check` command that can be integrated into your development workflow to catch problematic schema changes and encourage best practices.

To run it, simply point at your migrations directory.

```sh
postgrestools check supabase/migrations
```

When you are setting it up in an existing project, you might want to ignore all migrations that are already applied. To do so, add `migrationsDir` and `after` to your `postgres-language-server.jsonc` file


```json
{
    "migrations": {
        "migrationsDir": "supabase/migrations",
        "after": 1740868021
    }
}
```

Alternatively, pass them directly.

```
postgrestools check supabase/migrations --migrations-dir="supabase/migrations" --after=1740868021
```

This will only check migrations after the specified timestamp.

For pre-commit hooks and when working locally, use `--staged` to only lint files that have been staged. In CI environments, you most likely want to use `--changed` to only lint files that have been changed compared to your `vcs.default_branch` configuration. If `default_branch` is not set in your `postgres-language-server.jsonc`, use `--since=REF` to specify the base branch to compare against.
