docs/reference/env_variables.md, before:

# Environment Variables

[//]: # (BEGIN ENV_VARS)


### `PGLS_LOG_PATH`

 The directory where the Daemon logs will be saved.

### `PGLS_LOG_LEVEL`

 Allows to change the log level. Default is debug. This will only affect "pgls*" crates. All others are logged with info level.

### `PGLS_LOG_PREFIX_NAME`

 A prefix that's added to the name of the log. Default: `server.log.`

### `PGLS_CONFIG_PATH`

 A path to the configuration file

### `PGT_LOG_PATH`

 The directory where the Daemon logs will be saved. Deprecated, use PGLS_LOG_PATH instead.

### `PGT_LOG_LEVEL`

 Allows to change the log level. Default is debug. This will only affect "pgls*" crates. All others are logged with info level. Deprecated, use PGLS_LOG_LEVEL instead.

### `PGT_LOG_PREFIX_NAME`

 A prefix that's added to the name of the log. Default: `server.log`. Deprecated, use PGLS_LOG_PREFIX_NAME instead.

### `PGT_CONFIG_PATH`

 A path to the configuration file. Deprecated, use PGLS_CONFIG_PATH instead.


[//]: # (END ENV_VARS)

Commit message:

feat: support standard postgres env vars for db connection (#674)
Support `DATABASE_URL`, `PGHOST`, `PGPORT`, `PGUSER`, `PGPASSWORD`,
`PGDATABASE` env vars for configuring the database connection with
highest priority.

we use bpaf(env()) for the cli, and support loading the db config
from_env for the lsp.

These env var names follow the standard [libpq environment
variables](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/libpq-envars.html)
(`PG*`) and the widely adopted `DATABASE_URL` convention used by tools
like `sqlx`, `diesel`, `prisma`, and `dotenv`.

### Example

```sh
DATABASE_URL=postgres://user:pass@localhost:5432/mydb postgres-language-server check file.sql
# or individual vars
PGHOST=localhost PGPORT=5432 PGUSER=user PGPASSWORD=pass PGDATABASE=mydb postgres-language-server check file.sql
```

### Precedence (highest to lowest)

1. Environment variables
2. CLI args / LSP client settings
3. Config file
4. Defaults

Closes #302

docs/reference/env_variables.md, after:

# Environment Variables

[//]: # (BEGIN ENV_VARS)


### `PGLS_LOG_PATH`

 The directory where the Daemon logs will be saved.

### `PGLS_LOG_LEVEL`

 Allows to change the log level. Default is debug. This will only affect "pgls*" crates. All others are logged with info level.

### `PGLS_LOG_PREFIX_NAME`

 A prefix that's added to the name of the log. Default: `server.log.`

### `PGLS_CONFIG_PATH`

 A path to the configuration file

### `DATABASE_URL`

 A connection string that encodes the full database connection setup.

### `PGHOST`

 The host of the database server.

### `PGPORT`

 The port of the database server.

### `PGUSER`

 The username to connect to the database.

### `PGPASSWORD`

 The password to connect to the database.

### `PGDATABASE`

 The name of the database to connect to.

### `PGT_LOG_PATH`

 The directory where the Daemon logs will be saved. Deprecated, use PGLS_LOG_PATH instead.

### `PGT_LOG_LEVEL`

 Allows to change the log level. Default is debug. This will only affect "pgls*" crates. All others are logged with info level. Deprecated, use PGLS_LOG_LEVEL instead.

### `PGT_LOG_PREFIX_NAME`

 A prefix that's added to the name of the log. Default: `server.log`. Deprecated, use PGLS_LOG_PREFIX_NAME instead.

### `PGT_CONFIG_PATH`

 A path to the configuration file. Deprecated, use PGLS_CONFIG_PATH instead.


[//]: # (END ENV_VARS)
